---
title: Voting
author: joefkelley
layout: post
date: 2012-11-08
url: /106
sfw_pwd:
  - y9jrskYE6N5j
categories:
  - Opinion

---
In the recent US presidential election, third-party candidates received around 1.5 million votes, which is just over 1% of all votes cast. That sounds like a small number, but think about it for a second. I would guess that almost everyone reading this knows at least 100 people who voted, and who really cared about and thought about their vote. So within those 100 people, there's probably at least one who took time to think about this decision, and came to the conclusion that voting for a third party was their best choice. Let's assume that these people are not stupid and not naive; they clearly knew that a third-party candidate had no chance of winning, but voted for them anyway. With this in mind, there are a number of reasons for voting third-party, but none of them are really practical; most are ideological. Some of them probably did it as a form of protest, thinking that the two main parties' candidates are so unappealing that they refused to vote for one of them. Others might have believed it to be dishonest to vote for anyone other than the person they believe most deserving, regardless of their actual chances of winning. From a purely tactical standpoint, the "correct" vote would have been to vote for whichever of the two main candidates they liked more, but everyone voting third party felt strongly enough about their vote that they chose to do something else. The 1% voting third-party are the die-hard third party supporters. My suspicion is that there are vastly more people who would vote for a third party if they believed it to be viable to win the election.

This is a natural consequence of our voting system. The "vote for only one, winner takes all" scheme that we use is called "First Past the Post" voting, and it's in fact only one of several viable voting systems, many of which are in use across the world. I consider their choice of this system to be one of the biggest mistakes the founding fathers made. Under FPTP, a two party system is inevitable, and voters get stuck with a "lesser of two evils" decision. To illustrate why, I'll walk through an hypothetical series of elections.

Consider a new country in which there are three main political parties: A, B, and C. Say we have a vote, and the outcome looks like this:

- A: 45%
- B: 40%
- C: 15%:

So A's candidate gets elected. Next year, there's another vote. From the perspective of someone in the C party, it would seem pretty clear that they're not going to win, but they like B's candidate a lot better than A since they agree with B on more issues than with A. If they vote for C again, A will win again, but if they vote for B, B will win, which is slightly better for them. Most of the C party feels this same way, so the vote turns out like this:

- A: 45%
- B: 54%
- C: 1%

Now let's say that over time, both the A and B parties aren't doing a very good job, so support starts to shift away from them. But they're still the only two "viable" parties, so voters have to vote for one, or risk "wasting" their vote. Given a long enough timeline, it could even be the case that support for a third party overtakes one of the major parties, but the vote doesn't reveal this. Even if more than 90% of the population would be in support of a third party, it doesn't matter if everyone still believes the main two parties to be the "viable" parties.

There's really no reason it has to be like this, though. There are plenty of other voting systems in use today. I'll go through a sampling:

**Approval Voting**
  
Under approval voting, each voter chooses whether or not they approve of each candidate. They can approve of as many or as few candidates as they like. Whichever candidate gets the most total approvals wins. The clear bonus here is that voters can still vote for a third party while not forfeiting their ability to influence which of the two most popular parties ends up being elected. Gradually, perhaps those third party numbers could rise, and it could become one of the top options. There's no suppression of support - the numbers for the minor parties are an accurate representation of the population's approval of them, not affected by tactical voting.

When more than two options are getting close, voting under approval voting becomes an interesting and difficult decision. Consider the situation with three parties, A, B, and C again, and assume it's pretty likely that any one could win. Let's say you like B a lot, C a little less, and you hate A. Should you approve of both B and C? What if C ends up winning over B by just a little bit? Then maybe you should approve of only B... but then what if A wins over C by just a bit? It can get complicated pretty fast. But maybe that's not an issue, maybe the complexity of it would prevent some voters from voting tactically, and they would instead simply vote for whoever they actually approve of. That's kind of the goal here- to get the votes to line up with people's actual opinions, and not their game-theory best strategic option.

**Instant Run-off Voting**
  
With instant run-off voting, each voter ranks the candidates from best to worst. All of the first-place votes are counted, and whoever received the least amount of votes is eliminated. Then, the process is repeated, except without the bottom candidate, and on ballots where that candidate had been ranked first, their vote now goes to their second choice. For example, if your ballot ranks the candidates A,D,C,B,E , and A is eliminated in the next round, your vote the is switched to D. If D is eliminated, it is switched to C.

The good thing about IRV is that there's never any disincentive to vote for anyone other than who you actually want to win. If you rank a third party first, and they're out of the running soon, now your ballot is exactly the same as if you hadn't ranked the third party at all and just voted on the remaining parties.

**Proportional Representation**
  
This one isn't as relevant to elections for single positions, like presidential elections, but is something to consider when you're voting for more than one position, like in the case of the senate or congress (or parliament in other countries). The idea is that if a party gets some percentage of the total vote, they get that same percentage of the seats. The ~0.9% that the Libertarian party got in the recent presidential election would be good for about four congress seats and one senate seat.

If you think about it, we already do something similar to this, albeit in a convoluted way that still squashes third parties. California has about 12% of the population, so they pick about 12% of congressmen and women. Under proportional representation, if a third party had 12% of the population, they too would pick about 12% of the country's representation.

There are all sorts of arguments for alternative forms of voting, and honestly, almost any one of them would be better than our current system. All kinds of crazy things are possible under our system; here's a few:

  1. Even if a majority (>50%) of voters prefer every third party candidate to every major party candidate, and vote accordingly, a major party candidate can still win.
  2. With everyone voting for their first choice, it's possible for a third party to get less than 1% of the vote, even if, under any one-on-one race, third party vs Republican or third party vs Democrat, the third party would win.
  3. It's possible to outright win the presidential election with under 22% of the popular vote.

The depressing thing is that this will probably never change. It's a catch-22: FPTP puts two parties in power, and those two parties want to stay in power, so they make the laws to keep FPTP around. It would take some major event, a huge shake-up in our political system, to change anything, and we desperately need it. It disgusts me that people don't see a big problem with having to vote for the lesser of two evils, or feeling like they are throwing their vote away. There's a lot of things we got right with our system of government, but the way we elect our officials is not one of them.
