---
title: What this election means to me
author: joefkelley
layout: post
date: 2016-11-08
url: /906
categories:
  - Opinion

---
I have a lot of thoughts about this most recent election, but so do a lot of people much smarter and more well-researched than I, so I just want to post briefly about what the outcome means to me, personally.

I was born in Connecticut, lived there until I was 9, then lived in Ohio until I was 18, and then went to college in California and have lived there ever since. Whenever I get asked where I'm originally from, I say I grew up mostly in Ohio, because that's where I was when I was old enough to have some sense of community and form a connection to the state. If the conversation continues on the topic, it's really common for people, especially native Californians, to joke about Ohio being just a few farmers, or rednecks, or whatever other midwest stereotype.

In the past, I almost always defended Ohio. "It's actually the seventh most populated state," I would say. Or, "the people there are really genuine and friendly." Basically sticking up for the state in general. It became part of my identity in a way it ironically hadn't when I was living there. But I don't think I'll actively defend it anymore.

I'm trying to make sense of electing Trump. And I'm really really trying to give Ohioans the benefit of the doubt. But I just can't spin it in any positive way. In all of the major issues that seem to matter to Trump supporters, there's an undercurrent of an "us" vs "them" mentality. British political scientist Rob Ford posits that people are feeling like a stranger in their own country. White middle/lower-class voters say they are living in a country they don't recognize as "my" America. Why is that? What changed? Now it has Muslims and Hispanics and gay and trans people in it? And black people that feel they're not treated as equals and are standing up for themselves? Who told them there was such a thing as "my" America anyway?

Sorry, America is for everyone, even people you don't like because they're not like you.

>Give me your tired, your poor,

>Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,

>The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.

>Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me,

>I lift my lamp beside the golden door!

But Ohio disagrees with me. Ohio has voted many times in ways that I disagree with, but I could always at least somewhat empathize with the people voting the other way. Find a way to make peace with that part of my identity. This time it feels different. Today, I have no pride in being an Ohioan. I was even rooting for Michigan while it still hadn't been called.

Maybe I'll just start leaving it at "I was born in Connecticut."